---
layout: post
slug: on-japanese-tools 
title: On Japanese tools
---

There seems to be a general enthusiasm for Japanese tools that I’m not
impervious about.  When I’m talking about tools, it could be kitchen utensils,
woodworking or writing tools.  Sometimes it comes across as a form of snobbery.
An “if you know, you know” situation.  People will wave their proud possession
under your nose and tell you everything about it.  Which I’ll do later on.

But first, what makes Japanese tools better?  Maybe it is the foreignness that
makes it more attractive.  The proverb says *the grass is always greener on the
other side*.  Perhaps on the *other side*, they have a fascination for German or
French tools?  Doing things differently is also an attractive thing for the
rebellious.  For example, Japanese saws cut on the pull stroke, unlike most
European saws that cut on the push stroke.  Woodworkers claim that it is much
more efficient.

Finding the right tool is about preparation and gathering knowledge and
experience.  When you find the best tool, using it becomes a ritual and grants
you membership to an exclusive club.

My other theory is that we seek pleasure from things well made.  Using the
perfect tools for a job has a similar effect as ASMR audio tracks.  It gives you
shivers.  Have you experienced this?  Using the right tool is a sort of
escapism.  A trip to an alternative reality where everything works and fits
perfectly.

Another question to ask is why do Japanese make better tools?  It must come from
their culture and reverence for tradition, precision and well-done work.  It’s
no surprise that Japan has significantly more long-lasting businesses than other
countries.  There is even a word for that.
[Shinise](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shinise) are companies operating for at
least a hundred years.  And it’s not only physical tools.  Take the [Toyota
Production
System](https://global.toyota/en/company/vision-and-philosophy/production-system/).
Or the [Kanban method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanban) that has been
adopted by many developers worldwide.  Those are untangential tools.

Having the right tool for the job is the most efficient way of getting things
done and having the upper hand in a life where we don’t have any control.  When
the World feels broken, we find solace in well-made things.  They embody
perfection.  What are your favourite Japanese tools?

## Appendix: the Japanese tools I currently own

### Baby food masher

It looks like a bent fork that can stand up. It was originally made for quickly
mashing baby food. I mostly use it to make guacamole, avocados on toast and
smashing bananas for banana bread. It feels well-made and does a fine job.

![A bent fork made for mashing food](/images/fork.jpg)

### Oroshigane

I use it to grate garlic and ginger into a very fine paste. I don’t find it very
ergonomic, but it works. The resulting paste is very fine.

![A metalic root vegetable grater](/images/oroshigane.jpg)

### Mandoline

It’s very sharp. Beware of fingers.

![A plastic mandoline](/images/mandoline.jpg)

### Ruler

It feels very sturdy. I love most the font and the colours. It’s very readable.
Behind, there is a nifty conversion chart. It’s just a ruler, but it feels great
to handle.

![Front of a metalic ruler](/images/ruler-front.jpg)

![Back of a metalic ruler](/images/ruler-back.jpg)

### Chili dispenser

What I like the most is the organic shape made of wood.  It’s a tool but also a
decorative object.  It usually contains shichimi togarashi, a special chilli
flakes and spices blend.

![A wooden chili dispenser](/images/Togarashi.jpg)

### Pencil sharpener

This pencil sharpener can shape your tip with a different profile.  A switch
lets you pick 5 profiles from blunt to pointy.  Another button helps you
dislocate broken tips. Shavings are stored.  It does everything well, it is
compact, and I love the translucent design.  Very good.

![A translucent pencil sharpener](/images/pencil-sharpener.jpg)

### Washi tapes

They are so good and come in different colours and patterns. They don’t leave
sticky marks.  They feel like paper instead of plastic.  Perfect for gift
wrapping and scrapbooking.

![Various washi tapes](/images/washi-tapes.jpg)
